the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
all right a 92% I like it that's great I
told you there would be a formal charge
question and there was and you learned
it awesome that's what I like alright so
that was carbon had four no lone pairs
so for mine is zero fine minus half of
eight bonding electrons which is 4 so 4
minus 4 is 0 okay so today we are having
a clicker competition and problem set 4
will be posted later today and today's
goal is for all recitations but
recitation 12 to try to unseat
recitation 12 and the goal of recitation
12 is of course to win an unprecedented
third week in a row so that's that's the
goal for everyone today
now remember recitations that win
multiple weeks will put me in the
playoffs for the clicker competition at
the end of the semester for a specially
designed t-shirt ok more and clicker
competitions actually later today so if
we can get settled in I know it's
exciting and you are allowed to talk to
your recitations other recitation
members during the clicker questions
that is allowed but I will need to cover
a little material first so today we're
going to talk about shapes and molecules
and I brought some molecules with me
today to help me out and we're going to
be talking about Vesper theory so why is
shapes of molecules important so shape
which we can also call geometry so you
can ask about the geometry of the
molecule you're asking what is its shape
is particularly important in chemistry
because shape can't dictate properties
of a particular molecule it can tell you
about or dictate melting points or
boiling points or reactivity and I'm a
biological chemist
molecules because in in biology shape is
really important so you have enzymes in
your body catalyzing reactions and for
those enzymes to work they are specially
designed to react with one particular
kind of molecule or not any molecule in
the cell so they're designed to
recognize the shape of that molecule so
biochemistry really works by shape
recognition so shape is very important
so there's a lot of ways to get
information about shape but there's one
very simple theory that does exceedingly
well in predicting the shapes of small
molecules and that is called the valence
shell electron pair repulsion theory
which is known as Vesper and is also
known as the VSEPR theory I will call it
Vesper because it is really hard to say
VSEPR theory
so Vesper is the topic today and this is
based on lewis structures so this is
highly exciting because you just
finished a problem set that had you draw
lots of lewis structures and now on the
next problem set you can draw more Lewis
structures and then tell us about a
shape so so that's very exciting so
you're gonna retain all of the knowledge
that you've gained in the last problem
set and continue on with that problems
alright so this is a very simple theory
and it's based on the idea that valence
shell valence electron pairs repel each
other electrons repel each other they're
negatively charged they repel each other
that is the heart of this theory very
simple and as many of you may have
gathered I love it when very simple
theories explain a lot of stuff I enjoy
that gets it this doesn't get read 100%
of the time I'm okay with that
I'm good with about 90% so this works
really pretty well so again we're
talking about the geometry around a
central atom and the idea is
that the atoms are lone pairs around
that central atom are going to move in
such a way attained such a shape such
that the repulsion is minimized so this
is all about minimizing repulsion
minimizing stress again I'm a big fan of
minimizing stress so I also like Vesper
for that reason as well Lewis structures
what causes stress problem sets oh but
they build character all right
Vesper very simple nomenclature again I
like simple nomenclature a is the
central atom maybe should we see but
atom is there so central atom is a X is
the bonding atom and E is the lone pair
of electrons so a lone pair electrons X
is whatever bonding atom and a a is in
the center a is the central atom it's
one more term you need to know for
Vesper
and that's steric number SN and that's
used to predict geometries so what is
steric number equal steric number is the
number of atoms bonded to the central
atom plus the number of lone pair
electrons and you count one pair as one
and so we want to note when considering
Vesper double triple bonds are all true
and single bonds all the same so you
don't have to worry about double triple
bonds right now they're all they're all
counts the same it's only the number of
bonded atoms and the number of lone
pairs so let's look at some examples of
this so we have our central atom a
bonded to two bonding atoms X with one
lone pair of electrons so if you were
asked what is the formula for this the
Vesper formula it would be a X to e as
shown there and then you might be asked
this
number and the steric number in this
case would be what three we have two
bonnie has one long pair of electrons
again the lone pair is just counts as
one so I could also draw this structure
with a double bond to one of the X's and
this would have the equation ax - e
exactly the same formula because we
don't care about the double bond in the
formula only the number of bonding atoms
only the number of lone pairs and this
would have an SN number of what three
right because it only matters about the
lone pairs and the atoms that's all we
care about here we don't care about the
double bonds triple bonds whatever we'll
care about them later but for right now
for geometry
we're only caring about bonded atoms and
lone pairs some of you will be very
happy after doing the last problem set
to know that you can apply Vesper Theory
to all the residents structures that you
may come up with when you're doing lewis
structures so if a molecule has one or
more resonance structures that's okay
Vesper can be applied to any one of them
also if there's more than one central
atom you need to consider those atoms
separately so in this case you would be
asked about the geometry around the
carbon and the geometry around the
oxygen but a lot of examples we have
today just have one central atom alright
so that's just a little introduction to
Vesper now there are two cases that
we're going to consider today one are
molecules without lone pairs and one are
molecules with lone pairs without lone
pairs is a little bit easier than with
lone pairs so let's start there and we
have a nice table for you I'll tell you
that these lecture notes are of high
value I've had people who take in this
course want to come back so it's a nice
summary of all these shapes so you want
to keep this in a nice secure location
highly desirable notes okay
so let's look at
formula type the simplest we have a x2
here so that has an SN number of two
because it has two bonded atoms and it
has this molecular shape and I brought
an example here and this is of course a
linear molecule and therefore the angle
and here we're talking about the angle
around the central atom so from this a
black atom to that black atom we'd have
180 so that's the simplest linear
molecule so let's get a little more
complicated and add three bonding atoms
so here we have a case of a x3 it has an
SN number of three there are three
things bonded to the central atom and
its shape is trigonal planar trigonal
should be remembered it looks like a
triangle and you should also remember
that it's planar you can hold it this
way and see all of the atoms are in one
plane and I'm making some at this point
because later on the exam when you're
asked to name geometries of things
people come up with all sorts of crazy
things so if I spend a little time doing
my demonstration here of the shapes of
molecules it'll pay off later in the
exam it'll it'll sear in your brain
it'll be hard to forget trigonal planar
what are the angles what's way
crash okay let's move on I have four
atoms SN number of four ax four so this
is our tetrahedral geometry and I'm
going to just note as it says down here
that when you have a thick arrow coming
out at you like this bond and a thin one
going back
that means the one coming out is coming
straight out towards you the dashed line
is going back into the screen and the
two that are not thickened or dashed are
in the plane so if I hold it like this
we have two atoms in the plane one
coming out one going back and so that's
the that's how if you see that drawn
that way and you will you can think
about it in three dimensions all right
so what's the angle of tetrahedral
109.5 so a lot of people have already
familiar with this is great if you're
not you will learn it quickly when you
do the problems alright well keep going
we have five and to move over here so SN
number of five we have ax five and
here's our shape so this is trigonal
bi-pyramidal so if you think about the
shape of your trigonal planar you see
along here we have our trigonal planar
so we have our trigonal shape but we
also now have an atom above and an atom
below and that forms kind of a pyramid
on top and pyramid on the bottom so it's
trigonal bi-pyramidal and there are two
sets of angles now what are the angles
in the equatorial 120 I love when people
yell things out it's awesome angle from
the axial to the equatorial alright
and one more basic shape group and
that's this one here we have six atoms
bonded to the central atom ax six and we
have this shape so now I'm holding it
two axial atoms two atoms coming out
towards you two going back octahedral
geometry and what are all the angles
here 90
all right
so let's look at some examples hopefully
everyone got the 90 and can write it
down if not I'm sure someone will yell
it out again for you all right so let's
look at some examples we were talking
about co2 and you calculated the formal
charge on it for me so we have a x2 SN
number of two this is linear and and our
angle is 180 and now we can explain why
this is nonpolar we learned before that
we had polar bonds where we had
difference of electronegativity between
the carbon and the oxygen which should
make a polar bond so you have two polar
bonds so why is this not a polar
molecule and it's not a polar molecule
because this oxygen is pulling this way
this one's pulling that way and that
makes it non planar because there's no
net dipole so shape is important for
this alright let's look at the next
example we've seen wow do these examples
before we were talking about Lewis
structure what was boron an example of
in complete octet that's right so here
is an example it has three things bound
bound to it and it has the shape of
trigonal planar and the middle atom is
incomplete octet but it's okay
boron and which other one are okay being
incomplete octet aluminum right so the
angles are 120 here now we move on we
have this molecule ch4 you know someone
tell me what this is methane so we have
a x4s number four and we have our
tetrahedral shape and our angles of five
right so methane we should all care
about greenhouse gas but also some
people believe will be the salvation to
our biofuel as an energy problem we will
see if that's true or not okay another
example over here so we have phosphorus
in the middle and five chlorines so what
is this an example of in terms of Lewis
structures yeah so this is a trigonal
bi-pyramidal or by pyramidal I think
both are right I don't know and so we
have our 120 and our 90 and this was an
example we had in Lewis structures or
something very similar of an expanded
octet so we have more we have five bonds
around the phosphorus and that's okay
because it's N equals three or greater
so we have example again an expanded
octet and if we keep going we'll have
another expanded octet so here we have a
x6 so we have six bonds around the
sulfur sulfur is okay with that and what
is the geometry here octahedral angles
90 yeah all right so we have several
examples here of things with expanded
octet seal so deficient octet all right
so this is pretty straightforward people
got a lot of points on exams and except
when they come up with all sorts of
weird kind of shapes that don't exist
but most the time you can learn this and
it's great with with lone pairs is a
little more complicated but also much
more fun alright so let's talk now about
what happens when we have lone pairs so
electrons in bonds are hanging out in
their bond and they're not really doing
much but being in their bond so they
have less spatial distribution than lone
pairs meaning that electrons in bonds
take up less space and electrons in lone
pairs they can be kind of anywhere
they're not restricted to their bond so
they take up more space and therefore
cause more repulsion so the whole idea
of when you're talking about Vesper with
lone pairs is that you're thinking about
electron pair repulsion and if you have
a lone pair that's going to give you
more repulsion than bonded electrons
because lone pair electrons can take up
more space so it's a very simple idea
but it actually works to explain a lot
of stuff and again the geometry
rearranges to minimize that repulsion so
when we're talking about repulsive
forces then we go from the moles most
repulsion lone pair lone pair that's
like too messy roommates living together
that's very repulsive situation lone
pair bonding pair and then bonding pair
bonding pair is the least repulsive to
neat roommates that usually works out
quite well so if we keep this in mind we
can now predict shapes of molecules
based on this repulsion so we can
rationalize shapes based on Vesper
Theory so now we can think about a x4e
has a seesaw shape which of these two
shapes is seesaw so we have one case
I'll make this one where we have the
lone pair
in an axial position and we have another
case where we have the lone pair in an
equatorial position so when you have it
in the axial position here you have
three bonding pairs of bonding electrons
pretty close they're 90 degrees away
from each other so there are three sets
of bonding electrons that will be
repelled pretty strongly now
clicker question think about what's
going to be true here how many things
with an equatorial lone pair will be
repelled strongly
very repulsive those lone pairs okay so
that was the answer we're going for two
because there are two sets of bonding
electrons here that are 90 degrees away
there are two that are 120 but 120 is
bigger than 90 so they're two that are
close whereas with this geometry there
are three sets of bonding electrons that
are 90 degrees away so it turns out that
the equatorial lone pair is more
favorable it has a little bit more room
in the equatorial area to spread out and
so this is the shape that we find we
never see this shape does not exist
we'll just take that away it doesn't
exist and this is called seesaw and let
me demonstrate to you why that is the
case maybe I'll do it this way so how
many of you had seesaws and a playground
quite a number
seesaws are not considered that safe you
know the heavy kid sits on it keeps you
up in the air for days or whatever until
your mom comes and gets you from the
playground or it gets off suddenly and
the seesaw flips and you go flying in
the air
but studies show actually that dangerous
playground equipment builds neural
networks and is good for cognitive
development so I think we could do a
survey here and see if there's a
correlation between how many of you
played with seesaws when you were a kid
and whether you ended up as an MIT
student or not that could be that could
be interesting but now none of you will
ever forget that this shape is seesaw
right you'll remember this forever okay
all right so this idea also is
responsible for a t-shaped molecule so
we'll add another one and I think this
is a little harder to rationalize why it
wouldn't go in a different place but
it does this is how it goes both the
lone pairs are in equatorial positions
and we get something that looks like a
tea so if you have a x3 or a x3 e2 SN 5
number
it's a t-shaped molecule we can also
think about our core octahedral geometry
and if you have two lone pairs so here's
our octahedral with six bonding atoms
and if you have two lone pairs and four
bonding atoms if you have ax for e2 it
has this shape the lone pairs go on
opposite sides and now they have they're
repelling the bonding electrons here but
they're far away from each other which
is favorable and this is called square
planar so it's Square and it's planar
square planar okay the two lone pairs
are far apart on the opposite sides of
the bond so in addition to predicting
these shapes which work pretty well we
can also think about the geometries and
when you get lone pairs you find
deviations from your standard geometries
so let's look at some examples so with
molecules with lone pairs such as NH 3
the angles tend to be smaller so we saw
methane before it was 109.5 you yelled
that nicely out for me these are both SN
4 this is ax 4 this is ax of 3e but it's
still an SN 4 system so it looks like
this we have here we have methane here
we have NH 3 and now we want to think
about which would be more repulsive the
bonded electrons or the lone pair
electrons in terms of the geometries
around so if we have hydrogen carbon
hydrogen angle of 109.5 here then here
with nitrogen we're thinking about
hydrogen nitrogen hydrogen and this lone
pair is pushing on those bonded
electrons
and it's taken up a lot of space this is
the messy roommate the messy roommate it
has a lot of stuff that's spreading out
all over your room and so instead of
having 109.5 amount of space you now
have 106.7 amount of space in your room
because it's just the messy roommates
just spreading out all over the place
pushing down on those bonds and the
bonds contract all right now let's go
back to trends in the periodic table for
a minute
we learned that atomic size increases as
we go down the periodic table because
what increases and so atomic size
increases as we go down think of this as
a messy roommate having more stuff so
the lone pairs now occupy a larger
volume still messy but now messy with a
lot more stuff and this stuff in peds in
your space so the angles tend to be even
smaller between the bonded atoms so we
had nh3 before at 106.7 but nitrogen is
up here
phosphorus is below it so it has a
bigger atomic size and it has lone pairs
that occupy larger volumes so this is
what happens
some of you may have experienced that
that is a messy roommate with a lot of
stuff now if you have a roommate that's
very neat they're putting their clothes
and drawers when the clothes are in
drawers just like electrons and bonds
they don't really go anyplace but when
the messy roommate does not put their
clothes when they're lone pair clothes
then they go and this is what happens
okay so we can predict now by looking at
periodic trends and thinking about how
much room those lone pair electrons are
taking up we can think about and predict
the angle between the bonded atoms all
right so this is pretty cool but can it
save the world
what do you think can best for save the
world do something important of course
it can it's part of chemistry
so let's think about a pressing problem
in the world right now and how Vesper
can address it and if you listen to NPR
open a newspaper these days you're
hearing about a lot of car bombs
explosions things are not good in the
Middle East we're hearing about all
sorts of I heard on the news about bombs
going off at a school and then when
parents rushed toward the school more
bombs went off I mean just really
horrible stories and even when the
conflict is over a lot of times those
improvised explosives are still there
they still exist in the countries and
it's estimated by the UN by the United
Nations that landmines kill 15,000 to
20,000 people mostly children women
elderly who are out in the farm fields
trying to grow food for their family and
they step on something and blow up so
how do you find these explosive devices
how do you find explosive devices that
are actively being used now in dangerous
parts of the world and how do you find
the explosive devices left behind when
the war is over so if you are Stephanie
you use Vesper that's what you do to
find those explosives so in her own
words now I'm gonna tell you or she's
gonna tell you why Vesper what she calls
VSEPR because she can say that better
than I can to find explosives
and I am a graduate student in Tim
Swagger's research group at MIT the
research that were perhaps the most well
known for is for sensing explosives such
as TNT new bigger better explosives have
been developed and two of these are RDX
and petn and these kind of have more
bang for your buck if you will
unfortunately they have an even lower
vapor pressure than TNT which means
there's even less molecules of the
explosive in the air and it makes them
even harder to detect the dogs that they
would send out are actually sensing
cyclohexanone and acetone which are
molecules that are used in the
purification of these two explosives
both cyclohexanone and acetone have a
carbonyl in them and this carbonyl then
can interact with a group known as the
urea we have two nitrogens
connected to a carbon that has a double
bond to an oxygen between them and these
nitrogen's have hydrogens on it that can
hydrogen bond with acetone or the
cyclohexanone that we're looking for and
what happens is that the lone pair from
the carbonyl reaches out and grabs those
hydrogen's and pulls them away from the
nitrogen's and this makes the nitrogen
hydrogen bond more lone pair light as it
becomes more lone pair like we see more
repulsion between the lone pair like
bond of electrons and the neighboring
bonds and by the VSEPR theory we know
that this is going to cause the bond
angle to become larger between the
nitrogen hydrogen bond and the
accompanying bonds and smaller between
the other bonds around the nitrogen and
this causes large-scale changes in the
polymer so we can see differences in the
way in the large scale the polymer
interacts with light as fluorescence so
it will start to glow or a refractive
index change which is also a different
way that the polymer interacts with
light we have instruments that can very
easily measure both
and refractive index and with these very
easy signals we now know that our
acetone or cyclohexanone and therefore
our be explosive is there for soldiers
this is a really big deal in Iraq and
Afghanistan there are minefields and
kind of improvised explosive devices
almost everywhere and the soldier is
over there really have to watch where
they step so if we can come up with a
handheld device and we have in the past
come up with some and I'm hoping that my
technology might in the future also go
towards these types of devices that will
be kind of attached to a robot and sent
out to kind of sniff out the area before
the soldiers go there you can really
save a lot of the soldiers lives as well
it's very cool to kind of do the
hands-on work in the chemistry
laboratory and then know that what
you've done at your bench well then one
day be actually used by someone and
potentially save their life okay so back
to Vesper and lone pairs let's look at
some examples and think about the shapes
we've seen some of these already but
let's look at some more so now we can
have ax to e SN number of three so two
bonded atoms one lone pair this has bent
geometry but again think about this lone
pair now we're going to talk about the
angles and when we were talking about
angles in this class we're talking about
the angles between the bonded atoms so
the angle from the lone pair down is
gonna be bigger because the lone pair is
really repulsive but we're gonna be
thinking about the angle between the
atoms you see so we asked about angle
we're asking about this angle between
one bonded atom central atom and the
other bonded atom so this really this
lone pair doesn't look that repulsive so
I just want you to sort of think more
about this so keep this in mind this is
really more what a messy roommate is all
about so if this is your lone pair
pressing down on those bonds what do you
expect
the angle is going to be what's the
angle in the normal case first so we
have 120 these bonding oh and now think
and actually that's a clicker question
think about what the answer is gonna be
we talked about the normal all right 10
more 10 more seconds
all right yes less than 120 so you don't
know exactly you can't say oh that's
gonna be one 18.5 or something but you
can say less than 120 that's that that's
how you would express it and I'll just
remind myself to say if you like these
model kits and want your own some
toothpicks and gum drops can create some
awesome Vesper model kits and we'll try
to bring some of these into a recitation
for people who want to have gumdrops and
toothpicks for making models okay so
let's keep going
so now we have our tetrahedral base
system ax and where we have ax 3e and an
SN number of four so based on 10 on on
tetrahedral and so here now we have
trigonal pyramidal so we have a bunch
this is why it's confusing it's not by
pyramidal if there's only one pyramid
here and it looks like a triangle so
trigonal pyramidal and now what are the
angles gonna be and you can just yell
this one out
yeah less than 109.5 and now let's keep
going and we have another clicker
question all right ten more seconds
okay so so the trick here is to think
about the parent geometry of the system
and so this is the parent geometry is
the tetrahedral system and we know that
because it has an SN number of four and
so when you have an SN number of four
then it's going to be less than 109
point five and this is called a bent
geometry so again you can think about it
with in terms of those you know if you
have some Hulk hands those lone pairs
are pressing down on the bonds and
compressing them so it's less than one
oh nine point five I just teach
chemistry because I like to buy whole
cans and have a justification for it
it's really the bottom line okay so if
we keep going now we have our friend
seesaw which you're never going to
forget and I'll rebuild my my oops wrong
one rebuild my seesaw over here so now
what are the angles here there's two of
them think about the the equatorial
angles yeah I'm hearing it less than 120
and the axial would be less than 90 so
the lone pair is pressing down both on
the 90 and on the 120 it's probably more
repulsive for the 90 but all you have to
do is say less than for both of them so
the trick is just think about the parent
geometry what are the angles in the
parent geometry and then it's less than
and if we keep going
with this we had our t-shaped
molecule as well so we add in another
lone pair to our sn5 case and what's the
angle now going to be with those two
lone pairs less than
less than nine days right all right so
there are so many possibilities for lone
pairs if we add yet another lone pair to
the system
what's my geometry yep this is going to
be now linear geometry and what's the
angle gonna be yeah it's just gonna be
180 so we don't have the lesson here
because whatever way it would Bend it
would be just moving toward more
repulsive lone pairs so there's no way
you can minimize the repulsion in this
case so it's just going to be a linear
molecule so now we're gonna move into
our s and six category and we're gonna
talk about a shape that we haven't
talked about yet so based on this what
happens we have our parent geometry of
octahedral and so this has six bonded
atoms SN six but now we're gonna take
off one of the bonds put it the same as
the figure we're going to take off one
of the bonds and put on a lone pair and
this is called square pyramidal because
you have this square here in your axial
it looks like a square but when you
consider you have an atom on top coming
down to these four atoms on the side
that again looks like a pyramid so this
is square pyramidal and what angle do
you think you're going to have here for
these bonded atoms all right so we can
keep going and we saw this one before if
we take off another bonded electron and
put it in a second lone pairs we saw
before those lone pairs want to be a far
apart from each other as they can so one
goes on top one goes on the bottom and
this was our square planar geometry
because it's a square and it's planar
now what do you think the angles are 90
right there's no there's nowhere to
escape when you have a messy roommate on
top and arresting roommate on the bottom
if you're in a triple between messy
roommates there's just nothing you can
do and you can't you can't minimize the
repulsion at all you just have to live
with it okay so if we keep going again
and now we're gonna add another lone
pair and it really doesn't matter where
we put that it's all equivalent and it
comes up with a shape that's t-shaped
again that makes sense when you look at
the structure and now what do you think
the angles are all right so if we put on
yet one more lone pair and take off a
bonded electron or take off one more
bonded up bonded atom and put on
electron what's our geometry right so we
have this structure it's linear 180 no
place to go
so we keep going far enough we come back
to linear a lot now let's just look at a
couple more some real life examples of
molecules and think about there think
about their geometries and shapes have a
couple more clicker questions so let's
start with our friend water and I had
water here so now let's think about what
the formula type is going to be for
water and what's our formula type ax yep
ax 2 e 2 2 bonded atoms two lone pairs
a number of four and remember what this
geometry is called bent yeah and this
explains then what we talked about
before that this is a polar molecule so
these are polar bonds between the oxygen
and the hydrogen and but in this case
it's not a linear molecule it's a bent
molecule so it creates a net dipole and
so that makes it a polar molecule and if
water had any other shape and was not a
polar molecule then life would be
entirely different because water is the
solvent of life so this shape pretty
pretty important for anything actually
they research them what what medical
doctors thought was the most important
topic to learn as an undergraduate and
pre-med education and the number one
topic that was most important was water
there and you just learned about it okay
so we keep going now and you have to
answer a lot of things about this on a
clicker question
all right just 10 more seconds we've got
to finish our handout
all right so let's go take a look at
this one and fill it in so we have our 8
X 4 which is an SN 5 system because we
have 1 e and then we have our seesaw
geometry all right so let's just fill in
in the rest here and see who's won the
clicker competition so for the next
system we have BR now it's it's expanded
so we have ax 3 e 2 SN 5 we've added
another lone pair and now this makes a
t-shape but it's kind of a little bent T
shape because of the repulsion we come
down we have ax 2 e 5 SN 5 we've added
three more with Zenon Zenon is expanded
here we have our linear shape we also
have Zenon with four things bound and if
we did the lewis structure that we'd
realize there's lone pairs on the top
and the bottom ax 4 e 2 SN 6 and this is
our square planar geometry so you can
predict a lot about just doing a lewis
structure thinking about where the lone
pairs you can project geometries and
let's see who has one today
we have enough sense all right Sam
alright see everybody on Monday
you